---
layout: base
published: false
title: On strategy taxes
---

From Michael:

Dad, you once asked me why Microsoft/Apple don't just swoop in and build a better solution for cloud storage and sharing than Dropbox. At the time, I mentioned how difficult it is to build a new product and how much conflicting corporate concerns can get in the way.

I was reading Ben Thompson's blog the other day, and he uses a term that I didn't know existed, but clearly explains the situation: "strategy tax."

A strategy tax is simply when broader corporate strategy interferes with a particular product. Microsoft and Apple have the resources and economies of scale to build a much better Dropbox, but their strategies constantly inflict a tax on their cloud storage solutions.


For Apple, the goal is to lock you in to their vertical stack -- so iCloud works much better on the iPhone than on Android or Windows phones, and the Windows version of the software is deliberately inferior to the OSX version. For Microsoft, the goal is to sell their other products -- SkyDrive is built into Outlook and Office and doesn't play very well with other services.

Google's cloud storage solution is much better than iCloud or SkyDrive, primarily because Google's strategy (get more people to put more information on the web) is mostly parallel to the needs of cloud storage.

Dropbox, on the other hand, has no strategy tax. Their only strategy is to build the best cloud storage system that exists. They also can employ "strategy credits," which are features that Dropbox can include easily but that they know other companies will refuse to have.

I googled "strategy tax" for a bit, and it seems that this is the first article to really use the term (Dave Winer, by the way, is the inventor of RSS). Appropriately enough, it was first used to describe Microsoft.

This is such a powerful concept; it really frames the issue in a way that makes it immediately understandable. It has already given me a few insights:

First, I think this means that the tech business oscillates between fragmentation and centralization. Microsoft was once an agile company that was constantly innovating. This allowed it to grow rapidly and makes lots of money, which it used to acquire top talent and develop ever more products. Over time, however, the strategy taxes from maintaining so many products built up, and Microsoft was transformed into the clumsy giant it is today. The promise of “Web 2.0” (what a strangely antiquated concept now!) has been funneled into the giant silos of Facebook, Twitter, Google, and co., but if history is any indication, their strangehold on data and social interaction will not be permanent.

Second, is this what is happening to Google? One big hypothesis for the shutdown of Google Reader is that it was in direct competition with Google+, and used a platform (RSS) that Google couldn’t control. Thus, Reader was shut down at the behest of broader corporate strategy – the biggest strategy tax imaginable. I’ve heard many alternate theories for why Reader was shut down, so perhaps I’m crying wolf, but it bears thinking on: has Google become too big to build optimal products? Just the other day Google Latitude was shut down and its features integrated into Google+.

This might just be a series of bad decisions on Google’s part – they can definitely still dream big (Wi-Fi through weather balloons! Gigabit fiber internet!), and two product shutdowns doesn’t mean that corporate strategy is shifting. Daniel pointed out to me that the biggest difference between Google and Microsoft is that Google is run by engineers while Microsoft is run by business people. Maybe that’s what will save them from stagnation.

Lastly, this might be the primary cause of inefficiency in tech today. Someone recently told me that the only two websites on the internet that don’t have a “Tweet this” and “Like this” button are Facebook and Twitter, respectively. Companies are sacrificing good products in order to further business strategies, which makes the web more isolated and more proprietary than it should be. Both Marco Arment and Anil Dash have written very eloquently on the loss of openness on the web these days.

No closing remarks, but we should talk about these developments.